The last lecture in this unit, what we are
going to do is, actually look at some examples
of algorithms and see how to compute their
upper bounds.
So, we will look at two basic classes of algorithms
in this unit, in this lecture. So, we will
look at some iterative examples and some recursive
examples. So, an iterative example will basically
be something where there is a loop and a recursive
program of course, will be something where
you have to solve a smaller problem before
you can solve the larger problem. So, you
have to recursively apply the same algorithm
with smaller input.
So, our first example is a very standard problem
which you must have done in your basic programming
course. Suppose, we want to find the maximum
element in an array a. So, what we do is we
initially assume that the maximum value is
the first value and then we scan the rest
of the array and wherever we see a value which
is bigger than the current maximum value,
maxval we replace it.
And at the end of this scan we return that
value of maxval that we have found which should
be the largest value that we saw in the entire
value. Now, remember that we said that if
we have two phases in this case, we have one
phase where we do an initialization, we have
three phases actually we do a loop and then
we do a return, it is enough to look at the
bottle neck phase, we said that if we have
two parts f 1 and f 2 then the order of magnitude
of f 1 plus f 2 is the maximum of the order
of magnitudes of f 1 and f 2.
So, in this case it is clear that this loop
is what is going to take the most amount of
time. So, it is enough to analyze complexity
of this loop. So, now, this loop takes exactly
n minus 1 steps. So, the worst case, any input
is a worst case, because we must go from beginning
to end in order to find the maximum value,
we cannot assume anything about where the
maximum value lies.
Now, when we are scanning the loop in every
iteration we do at least one step. So, this
is the comparison, one basic operation and
this may or may not happen. So, the assignment
happens, if we find a new value A i which
is bigger than maxval. But, since we are ignoring
constants we can treat this as some c operations,
some constant number of operations per iterations.
So, we have some c times n minus 1 basic operations
and if we ignore the c and we ignore this
minus 1, overall this algorithm is linear,
it takes order n time.
So, let us now move on to an example in which
we have two nested loops. So, supposing we
are trying to find whether or not an array
has all distinct values that is no two values
in the array A are the same. So, what we will
do is, we will take this array A and then
we will compare every A i and every A j and
if I ever find an A i equal to A j, then I
will return false. If I find no such A i and
A j, then I will not return false I would
return true.
Now, the point is in order to optimize this
if I am at position i, then I will only look
at elements to its right. So, I will start
with i plus 1 and go to n minus 1 and this
will be my range for j. So, in order to not
compare A i, A j and then A j, A i just to
avoid this duplicate thing what we have written
is for i equal to 0 to n minus 1. So, as I
look at each element j equal to i plus 1 to
n minus 1 to its right, check if A i is equal
A j.
So, now if I look at the number of times this
actually executes, then when i is equal to
0, j varies from 1 to n minus 1. So, there
are n minus 1 steps, when i is equal to 1
there are n minus 2 steps and so, on. So,
as I go down when i is equal to n minus 1,
there will be 1 step, when i is equal to n
minus 2 there will be one step. When an I
is equal to n minus 1 the outer loop will
terminate, but the inner would not run at
all, because we will go from n to n minus
1.
So, overall what we are doing is we are doing
0 plus 1, plus 2, plus n minus 2, plus n minus
1 steps. So, this is a familiar summation,
the summation of i is equal to 1 to n minus
1 of i and this you should know is n minus
1 into n, this is a very familiar recurrence
and this we have already seen actually, this
is O n square. So, we just ignore constants
n square by 2 minus n by 2 is O n square actually
we showed that this is theta n square, but
for this moment we are only looking at upper
bounds.
So, let us say this algorithms is O n square.
So, it is not a trivial, O n square in the
sense is not two nested loops of equal size,
it is not i equal to 0 to n, j is equal to
0 to n is i equal to 0 to n minus 1 and j
equal i plus 1 to n minus 1. But, still this
summation 1, 2, 3, 4 up to n is O n square
and this is something we will see often. So,
it is useful to remember this.
So, this is another example of a nested loops
and this is one which has 3 nested loops.
Now, here what we are trying to do is, we
are trying to multiply 2 square matrices A
and B. So, we have two matrices A and B and
we are trying to compute the product C. Now,
in this product C, if I want the i, j’th
entry, then what I do is that I look at row
i in the first matrix, column j in the second
matrix and then I have to pair wise I have
to do the first entry here in this row I do
the first entry in that column I would have
to multiply those two, then I have to multiply
the second entry and so on and then I have
to multiply the last entry and then I have
to add that up.
So, that is what this program is saying. So,
this is for each row for i equal 0 to n minus
1, then for each column j equal to 0 to n
minus 1. So, this is going through all possible
entries C i j. Now, I am saying that for this
new entry I start by assuming C i j is 0 and
then I run through this row k equal to 0 to
n minus 1, I look at A i k that is the kth
element in the row, B k j the kth element
in this column, multiply them and add it to
C i j. So, this is a loop outer loop of size
n, this is another loop, inner loop of size
n and the inner most loop of size n and this
in order n cube. So, this is a natural example
of an n cube algorithm.
So, our final iterative example is one to
find the number of bits in the binary representation
of n. So, this is just the same as dividing
n by 2 until we reach 1 or 0. So, let us assume
that n is a non-negative number. So, n is
0 or 1. So, we assume by saying that the number
of bits is at least 1 and then so long as
we have a number which is bigger than 1, we
will add one more to the count number of digits
and then this is a short form for integer
division. So, we will replace n by n by 2.
So, for instant supposing we start with a
number like 9, then we will start with count
is equal to 1, because... While n is bigger
than 2, I will divide by 2 and add 1 to count.
So, I will replace count make it 2, now make
this 4, then I will say that it is still greater
than 1. So, I will make this 3 and I will
make this 4 by 2, then I will say this is
still bigger than 1. So, I will make this
1, then I make this 4. So, now, I have count
equal to 4 and n equal to 1. So, this loop
exits and I return count. So, it says that
it requires 4 bits to represent number 9 which
is correct, because the number 9 in binary
it is 1001. So, now what is the complexity
of this loop? Well, how many times does this
execute? Well, it will execute as many times
as it takes for n to come down from its value
to 1. So, I want n, n by 2 n by 4 etcetera
to come down to 1.
So, how many times should I divide n by 2
to reach 1 and this is the same as going backwards,
how many times should I multiply 1 by 2 to
reach n. So, dividing n by 2 repeatedly to
reach 1 is the same as multiplying 1 by 2
repeatedly to reach n and this is nothing
but, the definition of the log, what power
of 2 reaches n. So, this iterative loop actually
though does not decrement by 1, decrements
by halving n each time, we can still calculate
it explicitly as requiring log to the base
2 n steps.
So, we have seen iterative examples of linear
time, quadratic time, cubic time, that is
n, n squared, n cube and also a linear example
with log n time. So, now let us look at one
recursive example to see, how we would try
to do this when we have a recursive solution.
So, we would not look at a formal algorithm,
but rather an informal puzzle. So, this is
a well known Towers of Hanoi. So, in the towers
of Hanoi puzzle we have as we see in this
picture here, we have 3 wooden pegs which
we will call for the moment A, B and C.
So, we have pegs A, B and C and our goal is
to move these n disks from A to B. So, the
thing that we are not allowed to do is to
put a larger disk on a smaller disk. So, if
we take the small disk and move it here. So,
we move the first disk here, then we must
take the second disk and move it there, because
we cannot put the second disk on top of the
first disk. So, the goal is to do this in
an effective way.
So, the actual goal is to move everything
from A to B and this is our intermediate thing,
because as we saw, we move the first disk
from A to B we are struck, we cannot move
anything else onto B. So, we must use C as
a kind of transit peg or a temporary auxiliary
peg in order to do this job. So, if you have
not seen this problem before, you might want
to think about it in your spare time, but
this is a very classical puzzle and it has
a very standard recursive solution.
And the standard recursive solution is the
following that you first assume that you know
how to solve the problem for n minus 1 disks.
So, at this moment you want to move n disks
from A to B. So, what you do is you first
move n minus 1 disks. So, you have on A only
the bottom disk left and you have now B empty
and you have moved all the other n minus 1
disks to C. So, there are now n minus 1 disks
here. So, you have assumed that you can do
this using B as my transit peg.
So, now I move things from A to C, now what
I do, I move this disk here. So, I now have
disk here and I no longer have anything there.
So, now, I have one biggest disk on B. So,
I can put anything on it and I have n minus
1 disks on C. So, what I do is I apply the
same algorithm for n minus 1 to move things
from here to here using now A as my transit
pegs.
So, this is the recursive way to solve the
problem, you move n minus 1 disks from A to
C, move the biggest disk from A to B and then
move n minus 1 disks, back from C to B. So,
the question we want to ask is, how many times
do we move disks in this procedure?
So, supposing we write M of n to indicate
the number of moves we need to transfer n
disks from one peg to another peg. So, what
we have seen is that in order to transfer
n disks, we first transfer n minus 1 disks
from A to C, then we transfer one disk from
A to B and then n minus 1 disks back from
C to B. So, it is M of n minus 1, this is
to transfer n minus 1 disks plus 1 for that
1 disk and then M of n minus 1. So, this I
can simplify as 2 times M of n minus 1 plus
1.
So, M of n in general is 2 times M of n minus
1 plus 1 and if we have only one disk to transfer,
then there is no problem we can do it directly
in one step. So, M of 1 where n is equal 1
is 1. So, this kind of expression of describing
M n recursively in terms of smaller values
of capital M, is called a recurrence. So,
we have a recursive expression for M n, now
we have to solve this. So, the way we are
going to solve this is to use a notion of
repeated substitution, we are going to repeatedly
use the same rule to simplify this expression,
until we reach everything in terms of M 1
and then we can plug in the value.
So, we start by the basic expression. So,
M of n is 2 times M n minus 1 plus 1, now
what we do is we substitute for M n minus
1 the same expression in terms that n minus
2. So, M n minus 1 by the same expression,
is 2 times M n minus 2 plus 1, because in
general for any M we have M n is 2 times M
of n minus 1 plus 1. So, this is a general
expression. So, we are taking...
So, we do this and we simplify it, we get
2 times 2. So, we get 2 square coming from
this M n minus 2 and then we take 2 times
1 that gives us this 2 plus 1. So, we have
just rewritten this as 2 square M n minus
2. Now, again if you take this expression
M n minus 2 that becomes 2 times M n minus
3 plus 1 and then this 2 square plus 1 is,
this 2 square remember is 4. So, this I get
4 inside and 2 squared times 2, is 2 cubes.
So, I get 2 cube M n minus 3 plus 2 square
plus 2 plus 1.
Now, you can see that if I do this k times
I will have 2 to the k M of n minus k. Remember,
everywhere I have this and I have this, this
is the same number and this is 1 plus 2 plus
4, next time will be 1 plus 2 plus 4 plus
8. So, this is actually 2 to the k minus 1
to this is nothing but, 2 cube minus 1 it
is nothing but, 2 squared minus 1. So, in
general after k steps I have this, now when
I do this n minus 1 times then n minus n minus
1 is nothing but, 1 n minus n plus 1.
So, if I do this n minus 1 times k is n minus
1 then n minus k becomes 1 and this n minus
1. So, since n minus n minus 1 is 1 I can
just omit it from this thing. So, I have 2
to the n minus 1 plus 2 to the n minus 1 minus
1. But this is nothing but, 2 times 2 to the
n minus 1 which is 2 to the n. So, I can combine
these as 2 to the n. So, therefore, this gives
us by this repeated expansion, substitution
whatever you would like to call it.
We have that M n minus.. M of n is 2 to the
n minus 1 in other words, it takes an exponential
number of steps in order to solve this puzzle.
So, there is a very famous story by someone,
which talks about this some temple word these
pegs are there and it has 64 such disks and
it says that the world will come to an end
when the 64 disks are transfered. So, you
can thing about how much time it will take
to transfer 2 to the 64 disks, in order to
solve the puzzle with 64 disks.
Remember, we said that 2 to the 30 is about
1 billion. So, this is an enormous amount
of time I do not think you really need to
worry about this as a serious problem if that
is indeed the case.
So, to summarize we have looked at some examples
just to illustrate the flavor of how we apply
the concepts we have studied in terms of big
O in an actual algorithm, how do we look at
an algorithm and actually extract its complexity.
So, for an iterative program basically focus
on the loops, because the loops are what take
up the time and you have some times to be
a bit clever about trying to understand, how
many times a loop executes, for recursive
programs we saw only one example, we will
see more as we go along.
But, the main idea is you express the time
complexity of the program as a recurrence,
you write t of n the time taking for n steps,
in terms of a smaller value which is obtained
from the recursive call. So, for the Hanoi
case we had n and n minus 1. So, in order
to solve the problem for n disks we needed
to solve the problem twice for n minus 1 disks.
We will of course, find examples which do
not fit any of these, it will not be a simple
loop that we can calculate and then we will
have to be a little more careful about how
we actually count the operations.
So, in a sense actually estimating the efficiency
of an algorithm, it is really like accounting.
So, you are kind of keeping track of all the
basic operations and you have to do a good
job of making sure that you do that to keep
track of them in the best possible way so
that you get an accurate picture of the answer.